<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="sl" xml:lang="sl">
   <head>
      <title>Summary</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/main.css" />
   </head>
   <body>
      <section epub:type="chapter"><a id="ch09"></a>
         C. Summary
         <a id="ch09-subch01"></a>
         <h3 class="text-center">History of the National Assembly of the Republic of Slovenia 1992-2014<sub class="citation">pog.C.1.</sub></h3>
         <a id="p-299"></a><p>After Republic of Slovenia became independent in 1991 and adopted a new political
            system, the parliament as the central legislative and representative body of the
            state was formed anew. In accordance with the concept of a modern parliamentary
            democracy, the constitution drawn up in 1990 and 1991 bestowed upon it a powerful
            role with numerous jurisdictions in the political and social life of the state.
            Besides the classic representative and legislative function (adopting the
            constitution, laws, budget, resolutions and national programmes, ratifying
            international agreements, calling referendums, deciding on the declaration of the
            state of war and state of emergency, etc.), the Slovenian parliament also performs
            a supervisory function (deciding on parliamentary investigations and votes of
            confidence, posing parliamentary questions, deciding on the impeachment of the
            President of the Republic, Prime Minister and the ministers) and elects, appoints
            and relieves its own leadership, government, judges, the ombudsman, the governor
            of the Bank of Slovenia, members of the Court of Auditors, etc.).<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.1.</sub></p>
         
         <p class="milestone text-center">* * *</p>
         <a id="p-300"></a><p>To date the national assembly has concluded five terms of office. At the first
            National Assembly elections in 1992 the multiparty democracy was still very young,
            and the political space, in which the parties had not yet profiled themselves
            clearly in terms of their programmes, was therefore unclear. Every party took part
            in the elections with its own tactics, and low blows as well as serious struggles
            were not a rare occurrence. The campaign may also be ascribed with many
            transitional characteristics. It was a novelty and not only did it stir up the
            political life, but also the society in general, attracting many citizens and
            recounting many pungent stories which the journalists as well as the people could
            enjoy. The party leaders sought exposure, just like at all subsequent
            opportunities.<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.2.</sub></p>
         <a id="p-301"></a><p>The first structure of the National Assembly was quite fragmented, as eight
            parties qualified for it. The majority of votes went to the <a id="org-1279"></a>Liberal Democracy of Slovenia<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1279">[or.]</a></sup> (hereinafter <a id="org-1280"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1280">[or.]</a></sup>), while the other parties lagged behind it
            considerably. At that time the future Prime Minister <a id="oseba-1252"></a>Janez Drnovšek<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.DrnovsekJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1252">[os.]</a></sup> managed to form a diverse
            coalition, called a <q>small political miracle</q>, for it consisted of <a id="org-1281"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1281">[or.]</a></sup>, the <a id="org-1282"></a>Christian
            Democrats<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SKD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1282">[or.]</a></sup> (hereinafter <a id="org-1283"></a>SKD<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SKD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1283">[or.]</a></sup>), the
            <a id="org-1284"></a>United List<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1284">[or.]</a></sup> as well as the <a id="org-1285"></a>Social Democratic Party of Slovenia<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1285">[or.]</a></sup> (hereinafter
            <a id="org-1286"></a>SDSS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1286">[or.]</a></sup>). After the relations between the
            coalition and the opposition had been established, the parliament started
            addressing its extensive agenda. This primarily included the urgent legislative
            activities, since on one hand the former federal legislation had to be replaced,
            while on the other hand the basic acts of numerous state subsystems had to be
            adopted – from education, judiciary, tax system, ownership transformation and
            construction of the new economic system to national security, political parties
            and corruption. In accordance with its ambitious plan the parliament pursued its
            tasks diligently – the members of parliament mostly discussed the materials
            realistically and with appropriate political passion. The debates may have
            occasionally transcended the fields regulated by individual acts, but remained
            within the context of the issues at hand. However, since the very beginning the
            working enthusiasm of the parliament has not been in line with its public image.
            The people would never notice any diligent members of parliament. Apart from the
            basic legislative activities, the economic issues were the leitmotif of the first
            term of the National Assembly. As the term progressed, <a id="oseba-1253"></a>Drnovšek<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.DrnovsekJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1253">[os.]</a></sup>'s coalition gradually fell apart,
            and in the end it only consisted of <a id="org-1287"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1287">[or.]</a></sup> and
            <a id="org-1288"></a>SKD<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SKD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1288">[or.]</a></sup>.<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.3.</sub></p>
         
         <p class="milestone text-center">* * *</p>
         <a id="p-302"></a><p>After the elections, the second National Assembly found itself in a stalemate.
            Together the parties of the so‑called transitional right had 45 seats, while all
            the other parties including the two minority MPs, who supported the previous Prime
            Minister <a id="oseba-1254"></a>Drnovšek<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.DrnovsekJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1254">[os.]</a></sup> (president of
            <a id="org-1289"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1289">[or.]</a></sup>, the party which was the relative winner
            of the elections), also had 45 seats. The parliament – the mirror of the society –
            found itself in a difficult situation, split in half... The initial session
            dragged on, and the opposing standpoints were evident at each step the parliament
            took. In the beginning of the term it seemed that the parliament had been idle for
            many months since the elections. However, the mere chronological facts do not
            convey much of a message, for dates scarcely mean anything on their own. In three
            months since the elections the parliament was nevertheless formed despite the
            stalemate, even elected its president with a large majority, carried out lengthy,
            occasionally bitter and remote but thorough and relevant discussions, and elected
            the Prime Minister. The National Assembly carried out its envisioned mission. It
            is understandable this took time. Then the search for an agreement continued,
            finally resulting in a large coalition between the biggest parties <a id="org-1290"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1290">[or.]</a></sup> and the <a id="org-1291"></a>Slovenian People's
            Party<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SLS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1291">[or.]</a></sup> (hereinafter <a id="org-1292"></a>SLS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SLS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1292">[or.]</a></sup>), also
            joined by the <a id="org-1293"></a>Democratic Party of Pensioners of
            Slovenia<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-DeSUS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1293">[or.]</a></sup> (hereinafter <a id="org-1294"></a>DeSUS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-DeSUS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1294">[or.]</a></sup>).<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.4.</sub></p>
         <a id="p-303"></a><p>The coalition, finally established after many difficult months, was quite diverse
            despite the limited number of partners, since <a id="org-1295"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1295">[or.]</a></sup> and <a id="org-1296"></a>SLS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SLS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1296">[or.]</a></sup> were two ideologically
            and socially completely different parties. The parliamentary practice of the
            second term confirmed this thesis to a considerable extent. The situation in the
            National Assembly was often confusing, and it seemed that <a id="org-1297"></a>SLS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SLS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1297">[or.]</a></sup> belonged to the opposition rather to the coalition. Furthermore,
            the opposition failed to carry out a well‑orchestrated offensive against the
            government or to supervise it, since it was divided itself at the ideological
            level. The <a id="org-1298"></a>Slovenian Democratic Party<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1298">[or.]</a></sup>
            (hereinafter <a id="org-1299"></a>SDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1299">[or.]</a></sup>) and <a id="org-1300"></a>SKD<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SKD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1300">[or.]</a></sup> were more closely related to <a id="org-1301"></a>SLS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SLS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1301">[or.]</a></sup>, while the <a id="org-1302"></a>United List of Social
            Democrats<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1302">[or.]</a></sup> (hereinafter <a id="org-1303"></a>ZLSD<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1303">[or.]</a></sup>) were
            more akin to <a id="org-1304"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1304">[or.]</a></sup>. The dissolution of the
            coalition often seemed inevitable.<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.5.</sub></p>
         <a id="p-304"></a><p>Despite all its crises (which were quite frequent, especially as far as the staff
            was concerned), the shaky coalition between <a id="org-1305"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1305">[or.]</a></sup>
            and <a id="org-1306"></a>SLS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SLS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1306">[or.]</a></sup> held almost until the end of its term.
            Meanwhile the parliament kept performing its visible and invisible tasks, in the
            context of which it was able to carry out many large‑scale reform projects. Thus
            towards the end of 1999, after lengthy coordination, it adopted a comprehensive
            pension scheme reform. However, not long after the adoption of the large‑scale
            reform in the spring of 2000, only slightly more than half a year before the
            elections, the relations within the coalition fell apart. At that point – after
            many difficult meetings, progress and setbacks – the kindred parties <a id="org-1307"></a>SLS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SLS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1307">[or.]</a></sup> and <a id="org-1308"></a>SKD<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SKD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1308">[or.]</a></sup> finally
            managed to agree on merging into a single party which would not be a part of the
            coalition. The downfall of the <q>declining</q> government was imminent. <a id="oseba-1255"></a>Drnovšek<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.DrnovsekJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1255">[os.]</a></sup> did not wait for the situation to
            resolve itself. He made his move ahead of his partners and he himself proposed
            that the <a id="org-1309"></a>SLS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SLS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1309">[or.]</a></sup> ministers be replaced with new
            ones. He tied the vote to a vote of confidence, which was not passed. Soon after
            <a id="oseba-1256"></a>Drnovšek<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.DrnovsekJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1256">[os.]</a></sup>'s fall, <a id="org-1310"></a>SLS + SKD<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SLS-SKD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1310">[or.]</a></sup>, after the unification the largest
            parliamentary party, proposed <a id="oseba-1257"></a>Andrej
            Bajuk<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.BajukAndrej" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1257">[os.]</a></sup> as the new Prime Minister. However, the new parliamentary
            coalition was not destined to last long, since the second term would be over in
            less than half a year. Furthermore, already after a bit over a month the coalition
            found itself in a serious political crisis.<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.6.</sub></p>
         
         <p class="milestone text-center">* * *</p>
         <a id="p-305"></a><p>On Sunday, 15 October 2000, the third National Assembly elections took place in
            Slovenia. Once again the election campaign took place and mostly the familiar
            parties and faces appeared in public... The Slovenian parliamentary-historical
            process gradually proceeded and evolved. The elections taking place at the turning
            point of the decade, century and millennium, were not an important milestone in
            themselves. However, symbolically they marked the onset of a new era. The first
            decade after the fall of the Berlin Wall, referred to as the time of freedom by
            the <q>best chronicler of the 20th century</q>
            <a id="oseba-1258"></a>Timothy Garton Ash<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.GartonTimothy" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1258">[os.]</a></sup>, drew to a close
            and the new <q>nameless decade</q>, an elusive time of an unclear character, was
            beginning. A year earlier the common European currency was introduced and NATO was
            extended to include the first three Eastern European countries, which had a
            special meaning for the processes of integration. Next year, on 5 October 2000,
            only ten days before the Slovenian elections, the last Yugoslav tyrant, Serbian
            leader <a id="oseba-1259"></a>Slobodan Milošević<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.MilosevicSlobodan" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1259">[os.]</a></sup>, was
            stripped of power in Belgrade. All of this can be seen as a historical censorship
            of a certain era. Slovenia was a part of these global developments. During the
            third term of the National Assembly it itself joined the European Union and NATO,
            which concluded (perhaps illusory) the process of the transition in this state. On
            top of everything, the third term was also the last term controlled by the large
            <a id="oseba-1260"></a>Drnovšek's<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.DrnovsekJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1260">[os.]</a></sup>
            <a id="org-1311"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1311">[or.]</a></sup>, the strongest party since 1992. The results
            of the elections on 15 October 2000 were most likely its swan song. <a id="org-1312"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1312">[or.]</a></sup> got a whooping 36.21% of votes, which translated
            into 34 parliamentary seats. The coalition included <a id="org-1313"></a>ZLSD<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1313">[or.]</a></sup>, <a id="org-1314"></a>SLS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SLS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1314">[or.]</a></sup> and <a id="org-1315"></a>DeSUS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-DeSUS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1315">[or.]</a></sup>.<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.7.</sub></p>
         <a id="p-306"></a><p>The weakness of the opposition, whose core consisted of <a id="org-1316"></a>SDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1316">[or.]</a></sup> and <a id="org-1317"></a>New Slovenia - Christian People's
            Party<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-NSi" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1317">[or.]</a></sup> (hereinafter <a id="org-1318"></a>NSi<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-NSi" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1318">[or.]</a></sup>), which
            refused to acknowledge the opposition status of the <a id="org-1319"></a>Slovenian National Party<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SNS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1319">[or.]</a></sup> (hereinafter <a id="org-1320"></a>SNS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SNS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1320">[or.]</a></sup>) and the new <a id="org-1321"></a>Youth Party of
            Slovenia<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SMS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1321">[or.]</a></sup> (hereinafter <a id="org-1322"></a>SMS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SMS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1322">[or.]</a></sup>), was
            largely characteristic of the third term and the forms of the parliamentary work.
            The coalition was gradually nicknamed <q>the voting machine</q> and in these
            circumstances the opposition had to be tough. Otherwise it would only <q>remain a
               part of the folklore</q>. <sub class="citation">ods.C.1.8.</sub></p>
         
         <p class="milestone text-center">* * *</p>
         <a id="p-307"></a><p>The fourth National Assembly elections, called by the President of the Republic on
            3 October 2004, on one hand gave the impression of the usual democratic routine
            with a standard election campaign, while on the other hand they remained limited
            by the established ideological and political patterns. The <q>cultural
               struggle</q> between <q>the left</q> and <q>the right</q> continued, even
            though its intensity was receding. The results of the elections were not
            completely unexpected, but they meant a radical ideological change. For the first
            time after 1992 the large <a id="org-1323"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1323">[or.]</a></sup> suffered a defeat.
            The winner of the elections that Sunday was <a id="org-1324"></a>SDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1324">[or.]</a></sup>
            with its leader <a id="oseba-1261"></a>Janez Janša<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JansaJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1261">[os.]</a></sup>, who had
            gradually become the head of the opposition after 1996. <a id="oseba-1262"></a>Janša<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JansaJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1262">[os.]</a></sup> also formed the new coalition and
            became the Prime Minister. If the evident strength of the coalition and weakness
            of the opposition were characteristic of the third term, we could conclude that
            the fourth term would be completely different in this regard. The coalition was
            less numerous, more diverse, and the opposition consisted of two experienced
            parties, which did not even give the new government the traditional 100 days of
            peace. Different circumstances and practices in the parliament were expected.
            However, no significant changes took place and the initial (unrealistic)
            expectations vanished. As it happened, the strength and public support of the
            coalition and the government were considerable in the beginning, and on the other
            hand the opposition succumbed to internal disorientation and dissolution.
            Especially <a id="org-1325"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1325">[or.]</a></sup> was obviously in a crisis. Thus
            the fourth term was quite similar to the third one, even if a few roles were
            changed. The European topics were an element which definitely brought together the
            members of the parliament, but many other topics resulted in a well‑established
            left – right division. <sub class="citation">ods.C.1.9.</sub></p>
         
         <p class="milestone text-center">* * *</p>
         <a id="p-308"></a><p>At the eve of the fifth National Assembly elections in September 2008, the
            Slovenian political space seemed quite clear and predictable. <q>Wellbeing</q>
            became the leitmotif of all parties, but the programme means of achieving it were
            increasingly vague and especially similar to each other. Therefore the voters
            could hardly make decisions on the basis of programmes and had to cast their votes
            on the basis of other factors: persuasiveness of the election campaign, charisma,
            ongoing affairs, their established political convictions, more or less irrational
            considerations... And as always, on the basis of unpredictable elements. Despite
            the expectations the relative victory went to <a id="oseba-1263"></a>Borut Pahor's<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.PahorBorut" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1263">[os.]</a></sup>
            <a id="org-1326"></a>Social Democrats <sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1326">[or.]</a></sup>(the former <a id="org-1327"></a>ZLSD<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1327">[or.]</a></sup>, hereinafter <a id="org-1328"></a>SD<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1328">[or.]</a></sup>),
            and <a id="oseba-1264"></a>Borut Pahor<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.PahorBorut" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1264">[os.]</a></sup> also became the Prime
            Minister.<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.10.</sub></p>
         <a id="p-309"></a><p>Already at the eve of the elections it was also clear that a debt and financial
            crisis was spreading globally, threatening to develop into a wider economic crisis
            and also engulf Slovenia. Pahor's team conveyed an impression that it was aware of
            the situation. However, in the following months it responded slowly and hesitantly
            due to the Prime Minister's consensual approach. However, the first batch of
            anti‑crisis measures was already addressed by the parliament towards the end of
            2008. The MPs adopted it at the last session of the year, thus almost symbolically
            announcing the central problem of the fifth term: overcoming the situation, which
            finally developed from an economic into a political crisis.<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.11.</sub></p>
         <a id="p-310"></a><p>Every important subject (or at least those underlined as important) involved a
            difference of opinions. When the government finally managed to agree on the
            resolution of the question of the border with the neighbouring Croatia, which we
            should undoubtedly see as one of its greatest successes, it immediately stumbled
            upon resolute protests of the opposition as well as some of the more prominent
            intellectuals (on the other hand a significant percentage of renowned
            intellectuals supported the agreement). Finally the parliament and the votes of
            the coalition supported the so‑called Arbitration Agreement, but the strongly
            rooted doubts persisted. The pension scheme reform also gave rise to considerable
            opposition. In the context of reforming the labour market the coalition also
            adopted the Mini‑jobs Act, radically amending the system of student work and
            shaking the foundations of the financial <q>empires</q> of the student
            organisations and student work services. Naturally, the students opposed the
            changes resolutely and organised student demonstrations in front of the National
            Assembly in May 2010. However, legitimate concerns about the new legislation
            turned into an unarticulated smearing campaign and even violence. Granite cobbles
            were flung through the air, a small fire broke out, and the parliament building
            (especially the entrance) was visibly damaged. The decisions adopted by the
            parliament were by no means <q>accepted</q>...<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.12.</sub></p>
         <a id="p-311"></a><p>The National Assembly became a place of permanent disputes, which was also
            reflected in the parliamentary discussions. The debate on the new Family Code
            proposal can certainly be counted among the especially irreconcilable and
            controversial issues, at the same time bringing the attention to profound
            ideological, conceptual and even cultural‑anthropological differences. The trust
            in the government and the parliament during this term was still low,
            dissatisfaction grew, and the economic crisis had been an evident fact for quite a
            while. The political space remained unappeasable and the coalition gave an
            increasing impression of being blocked within and without, not having any real
            ideas of how to solve the situation. Thus the path towards a political crisis was
            paved. The coalition gradually fell apart, finally only consisting of <a id="org-1329"></a>SD<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SD" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1329">[or.]</a></sup> and <a id="org-1330"></a>LDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-LDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1330">[or.]</a></sup>. <sub class="citation">ods.C.1.13.</sub></p>
         <a id="p-312"></a><p>Numerous referendums, where the voters decided about almost all significant
            projects of the coalition, were an important catalyst of the political crisis and
            dissolution of the coalition ever since the summer of 2010. Furthermore, only a
            single project was confirmed: the Arbitration Agreement with Croatia, and in this
            case the referendum was proposed by the coalition itself. The fifth term ended
            with the dissolution of the National Assembly by the President of the Republic on
            21 October 2011, after the government had received a vote of no confidence and in
            the absence of any new candidates for Prime Minister. For the first time in the
            almost 20‑year history of the Slovenian parliament an early election was called
            for 4 December. The trust in many parliamentary parties was shaken and a more
            thorough restructuring of the political space was expected.<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.14.</sub></p>
         
         <p class="milestone text-center">* * *</p>
         <a id="p-313"></a><p>The time between the announcement by the President of the Republic with regard to
            the dissolution of the National Assembly and the elections was scarce. In these
            circumstances it was not surprising that the campaign lacked any innovative
            approaches, convincing and lucid solutions, and insightful approaches towards the
            voters. The campaign was quite calm (although not without affairs), and for the
            first time in twenty years the divisive ideological topics were more in the
            background than before. This certainly does not mean that they did not exist and
            that they did not influence the voters' decisions, but the majority of the
            political debates nevertheless focused on overcoming the economic crisis and
            finding <q>exit</q> strategies. Even in the beginning of October the political
            atmosphere was still predictable. However, only a bit later the political space
            started to change radically as new political faces and new parties started
            entering the political arena one after the other. The fact that the voters were
            fed up with the established candidates resulted in a turning point. Less than two
            months before the elections two new parties with exceptionally high ratings
            appeared, climbing to the top of the pre‑election polls. The first party was
            established by the controversial and charismatic mayor of Ljubljana <a id="oseba-1265"></a>Zoran Janković<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JankovicZoran" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1265">[os.]</a></sup> (Positive Slovenia,
            hereinafter <a id="org-1331"></a>PS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-PS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1331">[or.]</a></sup>), while the second one was headed
            by the former minister in <a id="oseba-1266"></a>Janša<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JansaJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1266">[os.]</a></sup>'s
            government, <a id="oseba-1267"></a>Gregor Virant<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.VirantGregor" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1267">[os.]</a></sup> (<a id="org-1332"></a>Gregor Virant's Civic List<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-DL" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1332">[or.]</a></sup>, hereinafter <a id="org-1333"></a>DLGV<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-DL" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1333">[or.]</a></sup>).<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.15.</sub></p>
         <a id="p-314"></a><p>The campaign announced considerable political changes in the Slovenian space, and
            the results of the elections taking place on Sunday, 4 December 2011, only
            confirmed them. <a id="org-1334"></a>PS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-PS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1334">[or.]</a></sup> won the elections, but for the
            first time in the twenty‑year parliamentary history of Slovenia its president
            <a id="oseba-1268"></a>Zoran Janković<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JankovicZoran" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1268">[os.]</a></sup> did not become
            the Prime Minister. The coalition was formed by the leader of the <a id="org-1335"></a>SDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1335">[or.]</a></sup>, <a id="oseba-1269"></a>Janez
            Janša<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JansaJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1269">[os.]</a></sup>, which came in second. The parliament started working eagerly,
            immediately addressing the crisis and the fiscal consolidation of the state, of
            course. Thus the <q>new faces among the MPs</q> soon faced all the dimensions of
            their tasks. Due to the general situation in the state, in the first half of 2012
            they were even more closely scrutinised by the public as their colleagues during
            the preceding terms. In the times of austerity and shrinking budgetary resources
            in all fields that is not surprising, for of course in the end it is the
            parliament which has to adopt unpopular government measures, and the MPs,
            privileged and overpaid in the public opinion, are the ones who have to vote for
            them.<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.16.</sub></p>
         
         <a id="p-315"></a><p>In the second half of 2012 the dissatisfaction of people resulting from the economic
            crisis kept getting increasingly profound and more and more obviously oriented against
            the political elites. Numerous <q>people's uprisings</q> broke out. In the following
            months the area in front of the parliament building became the central
            location where different standpoints and opinions manifested and piled up – especially
            those wishing for completely different politics. The adjective "political" and especially
            politics as a profession focusing on the state and prosperity became pejorative terms.
            Mottoes about the wrongfulness of the political system as well as appeals for the
            introduction of direct democracy started appearing... Politics once again became similar
            to the oldest trade, and this was expressed by one of the protesters in a brutally
            direct,
            vulgar, but politically exceedingly meaningful banner: <q>A fuck or a refund!</q> In the
            beginning of 2013 it seemed that not only the coalition, but the whole of the political
            elite was put to the test. All the people were dissatisfied with everyone, but 
            the government with its parliamentary majority was definitely the focus of attention.
            Nervousness mounted and a political change was imminent... <sub class="citation">ods.C.1.17.</sub></p>
         <a id="p-316"></a><p>In January 2013 an <q>outsider</q>, one of the few that the public still trusted, started
            setting things in motion: the Commission for the Prevention of Corruption, which published
            a report about its supervision of the officials' assets. As the president of this
            Commission,
            <a id="oseba-1270"></a>Goran Klemenčič<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.KlemencicGoran" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1270">[os.]</a></sup>, said picturesquely:
            <q>When numbers talk, bullshit walks</q>. The Commission established that neither the Mayor
            of Ljubljana and leader of the <a id="org-1336"></a>PS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-PS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1336">[or.]</a></sup> 
            <a id="oseba-1271"></a>Zoran Janković<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JankovicZoran" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1271">[os.]</a></sup> nor Prime Minister
            <a id="oseba-1272"></a>Janez Janša<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JansaJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1272">[os.]</a></sup> were able to explain how their
            property had increased significantly over the last few years. Both of them screamed
            in
            unison that they were not guilty, but only their most fervent supporters believed
            them.
            The coalition fell apart.<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.18.</sub></p>
         <a id="p-317"></a><p>After the dissolution of the coalition things came at a standstill. The central problem
            of the creators of the new coalition was seemingly simple: the largest parties from
            both
            sides of the spectrum – the <a id="org-1337"></a>PS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-PS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1337">[or.]</a></sup> and
            the <a id="org-1338"></a>SDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1338">[or.]</a></sup> – were led by politicians burdened with the report
            of the Commission for the Prevention of Corruption. Only their resignation could have
            opened up new possibilities. However, while the <a id="org-1339"></a>SDS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-SDS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1339">[or.]</a></sup>
            kept supporting <a id="oseba-1273"></a>Janša<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JansaJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1273">[os.]</a></sup> unwaveringly,
            the <a id="org-1340"></a>PS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-PS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1340">[or.]</a></sup> gradually discovered that
            it might be wise to take advantage of this political opportunity. <a id="oseba-1274"></a>Zoran Janković<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JankovicZoran" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1274">[os.]</a></sup> resigned and "froze" his function
            as the President of the <a id="org-1341"></a>PS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-PS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1341">[or.]</a></sup> party.
            He did not date it: he stated he would do that when a new government under the
            leadership of the <a id="org-1342"></a>PS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-PS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1342">[or.]</a></sup> was elected.
            Although his manoeuver appeared trivial and the whole scenography of the
            <a id="org-1343"></a>PS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-PS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1343">[or.]</a></sup> was reminiscent of the political
            dilettantism from the beginning of the 1990s, this was enough for the future coalition
            partners. Under the leadership of <a id="oseba-1275"></a>Alenka Bratušek<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.BratusekAlenka" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1275">[os.]</a></sup> from
            the <a id="org-1344"></a>PS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-PS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1344">[or.]</a></sup> (the first female Prime Minister)
            a new Slovenian government was formed in March of 2013.<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.19.</sub></p>
         <a id="p-318"></a><p>After the new government was elected, the political storm started to calm down despite
            many problems in the Office of the Prime Minister and the unfortunate staff choices.
            In the beginning of 2014, a year after it had been in power, the coalition still seemed
            solid and in control. At that moment Prime Minister <a id="oseba-1276"></a>Bratušek<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.BratusekAlenka" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1276">[os.]</a></sup> decided
            to strengthen her position within the <a id="org-1345"></a>PS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-PS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1345">[or.]</a></sup>,
            and she announced an attempt to take over its presidency. The political situation
            looked favourable, and radical turning points were not on the horizon. However,
            in the spring of 2014 the principle notable in the modern politics (not only) in
            this space for almost 200 years once again surfaced in all its brutality: politics
            is the art of the possible, the anticipation of the unforeseeable, a performance
            involving the most unusual turns of events. The Mayor of Ljubljana
            and founder of the <a id="org-1346"></a>PS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-PS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1346">[or.]</a></sup>,
            <a id="oseba-1277"></a>Zoran Janković<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JankovicZoran" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1277">[os.]</a></sup>, decided to compete
            with <a id="oseba-1278"></a>Alenka Bratušek<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.BratusekAlenka" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1278">[os.]</a></sup> for the spot of the
            party president. For many people this was surprising, for many suicidal, for
            some irresponsible and for others the only right and prudent thing. In April 
            the members of the <a id="org-1347"></a>PS<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-PS" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1347">[or.]</a></sup> 
            elected <a id="oseba-1279"></a>Janković<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JankovicZoran" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1279">[os.]</a></sup> as president and
            a political crisis offering very few exits broke out. <a id="oseba-1280"></a>Alenka
            Bratušek<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.BratusekAlenka" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1280">[os.]</a></sup> resigned as Prime Minister. Thus the mandate of the entire
            Office of the Prime Minister ended
            automatically. Nobody proposed a new formateur, thus the President of the
            Republic <a id="oseba-1281"></a>Borut Pahor<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.PahorBorut" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1281">[os.]</a></sup> dissolved the
            Parliament on 2 June and called the elections on 13 July 2014 (despite significant
            criticism due to the coincidence with the summer vacations).<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.20.</sub></p>
         
         <p class="milestone text-center">* * *</p>
         <a id="p-319"></a><p>In terms of contents the election contest represents the seventh mandate of the
            National Assembly of the Republic of Slovenia. Once again it is expected that
            the elections will radically change the political and staff composition of the
            Parliament, similarly as in 2011. There are several reasons for this. After the fall
            of <a id="oseba-1282"></a>Janša's<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.JansaJanez" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1282">[os.]</a></sup> government the momentum of
            the people's uprisings gradually ceased. However, the dissatisfaction with the politics
            and the political elites remained, and the results of the public opinion polls remained
            inexorable. A few uprising groups, among others the movement of the All Slovenian
            People's Uprising, decided to take advantage of the <q>uprising</q> potential and actively
            enter into politics. In December 2013 the Solidarity party was established. In the
            next
            year, on 1 March 2014, the United Left was formed according to the model of the attractive
            and convincing Alexis Tsipras's Syriza in Greece. Shortly before the elections another
            three parties with heavy weight leaders entered the political space:
            the <a id="org-1348"></a>I Believe party<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-Verjamem" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1348">[or.]</a></sup>, headed by the
            former president of the Court of Auditors Dr <a id="oseba-1283"></a>Igor Šoltes<sup><a class="person" href="toc-persons.xhtml#pers.SoltesIgor" title="Imensko kazalo: oseba št. 1283">[os.]</a></sup>, the
            <a id="org-1349"></a>Alliance of Alenka Bratušek<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-Zaveznistvo" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1349">[or.]</a></sup> (gathered
            around her are the Members of Parliament
            and former members of the Positive Slovenia who had joined her), and
            the <a id="org-1350"></a>Miro Cerar Party<sup><a class="organization" href="toc-organizations.xhtml#org-Stranka" title="Kazalo organizacij: organizacija št. 1350">[or.]</a></sup>. The latter is
            even favoured by the pools,
            although all of its potential is concentrated in its undoubtedly well
            liked and renowned president.<sub class="citation">ods.C.1.21.</sub></p>
         
         
      </section>
   </body>
</html>